Preview - Keycloak Test Framework (#488)
keycloak/keycloak-web: blog/2024/preview-keycloak-test-framework.adoc

It would be good to mention few drawbacks, which stand out, when working with this https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/testsuite[test suite]. First of all is the complexity of various configurations and additions on top of the _Arquillian_  https://arquillian.org/[framework]. These changes helps to do what is the test suite capable off, but the cons is that without a proper documentation for beginners is almost unreadable. Second thing has the same importance, the _Arquillian_ https://arquillian.org/[framework] is not fully supported anymore. Other things to mention are complicated execution system, where you want to specify what exactly should be tested, then abstract classes with shared configurations, missing the option to add a custom extension, and last but not least, massive amount of tests without a knowledge if they are needed anymore.

== Brighter Future?

> Keycloak team had started a https://github.com/orgs/keycloak/projects/42[joint effort] between the engineering and quality engineering people to design a new https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-framework[test framework] (May 2024). It had been initiated with a prototype to verify, if our thoughts are feasible. The prototype should have been based on the _JUnit5_ testing framework, specifically to implement _JUnit5_ callback classes which extend the default test lifecycle functionality and provide custom inject annotations, like _@KeycloakIntegrationTest_, _@InjectWebDriver_ or _@InjectRealm_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keycloak team had started a https://github.com/orgs/keycloak/projects/42[joint effort] between the engineering and quality engineering people to design a new test framework (May 2024). It had been initiated with a prototype to verify if our thoughts were feasible. The prototype was based on the _JUnit5_ testing framework, specifically to implement _JUnit5_ callback classes which extend the default test lifecycle functionality and provide custom inject annotations, like _@KeycloakIntegrationTest_, _@InjectWebDriver_ or _@InjectRealm_.
```

> For our purpose we've https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/main/test-framework/src/main/java/org/keycloak/test/framework/KeycloakIntegrationTestExtension.java[implemented] these three callback classes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our purpose, we have https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/main/test-framework/src/main/java/org/keycloak/test/framework/KeycloakIntegrationTestExtension.java[implemented] these three callback classes:
```

----
BeforeEachCallback
AfterEachCallback
AfterAllCallback
----

After a successful test round, we've continued with a proof of concept extending features list to support multiple server modes, different databases and _WebDrivers_, clients and users setup, _SmallRye_ configuration support, _OAuthClient_ based on https://connect2id.com/products/nimbus-oauth-openid-connect-sdk[_Nimbus SDK_] (this feature is a preview only) etc. The full list of currently implemented features can be found here in the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-framework/src/main/java/org/keycloak/test/framework/annotations[annotations package].

> Are you curious where to start?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Are you curious about where to start?
```

> We suggest to read the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/main/test-framework/README.md[user guide], which will provide a basic overview how the framework works and should be used. If this is not enough, you can also check https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-poc/examples[examples module].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We suggest reading the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/main/test-framework/README.md[user guide], which will provide a basic overview of how the framework works and should be used. If this is not enough, you can also check https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-poc/examples[examples module].
```

> Once you find some bug or want to discuss something, or propose a new enhancement, please follow this GitHub feedback https://www.github.com/discussion#blabla[discussion] link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you find a bug, want to discuss something, or propose a new enhancement, please follow this GitHub feedback https://www.github.com/discussion#blabla[discussion] link.
```

== Coming Soon

> Preview - https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-framework[_Keycloak Test Framework_] will be introduced in _Keycloak 26_. We plan to add more features, which will cover 80% of functionalities currently available in the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/testsuite[integration test suite]. We also plan to introduce some new concepts, e.g. _@KeycloakTest_ annotation, which will add an option to test providers without _Keycloak_ server running. It should be based on the _KeycloakSession_ class. Another interesting features should be parallel execution on a GitHub runner, adding custom extension to a Keycloak server or enable Keycloak cluster setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preview - https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-framework[_Keycloak Test Framework_] will be introduced in _Keycloak 26_. We plan to add more features, which will cover 80% of functionalities currently available in the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/testsuite[integration test suite]. We also plan to introduce some new concepts, e.g. _@KeycloakTest_ annotation, which will add an option to test providers without the _Keycloak_ server running. It should be based on the _KeycloakSession_ class. Other interesting features should be parallel execution on a GitHub runner, adding a custom extension to a Keycloak server, or enabling a Keycloak cluster setup.
```

== Acknowledgement

> I would like to thanks to all people who put the proof of concept together and made it a real: Miquel, Simon, Filip, Moises, Jon, Pedro. Special thanks goes to Stian, who led the technical design and proposed very nifty things that raised the project to another level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would like to thank all the people who put the proof of concept together and made it real: Miquel, Simon, Filip, Moises, Jon, and Pedro. A special thank you goes to Stian, who led the technical design and proposed very nifty things that raised the project to another level.
```

:title: "Writing new tests has never been easier than before." Keycloak Test Framework
:date: 2024-08-28
:publish: true
:author: Lukas Hanusovsky

== How It All Started

The idea to replace the current https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/testsuite[test suite] has been on the table for multiple years. Initially, it was meant to be only a refactoring of the current approach on how to write tests, but after a few internal discussions and refactor updates it turned out a new test suite, based on a https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-framework[new framework] would be a better solution.

> It would be good to mention a few drawbacks, that stand out when working with the current https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/testsuite[test suite]. First of all, is the complexity of various configurations and additions made on top of the https://arquillian.org/[_Arquillian framework_]. These changes make the test suite powerful, but the cons is that without proper documentation for beginners is almost unreadable. The second thing has the same importance, the _Arquillian framework_ is not fully supported anymore. Other things to mention are a complicated execution system, where you want to specify what exactly should be tested, then abstract classes with shared configurations, missing the option to add a custom extension, and last but not least, the massive amount of tests without knowledge if they are needed anymore.

Reviewer 2: Not convinced about the statement `the massive amount of tests without knowledge if they are needed anymore`. There may be some tests not needed, but probably not a massive amount. Perhaps just drop this?

== Brighter Future?

> The Keycloak team began an effort to design a new test framework in May 2024. It started with a prototype to verify if our ideas were feasible. The prototype was based on the https://junit.org/junit5/[_JUnit5_ testing framework], specifically to implement https://junit.org/junit5/docs/current/user-guide/#extensions-lifecycle-callbacks[_JUnit5_ callback classes] which extend the default test lifecycle functionality and provide custom inject annotations, like _@KeycloakIntegrationTest_, _@InjectWebDriver_ or _@InjectRealm_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Keycloak team began an effort to design a new test framework in May 2024. It started with a prototype to verify if our ideas were feasible. The prototype was based on the https://junit.org/junit5/[_JUnit5_ testing framework], specifically to implement https://junit.org/junit5/docs/current/user-guide/#extensions-lifecycle-callbacks[_JUnit5_ callback classes] which extend the default test lifecycle functionality and provide custom inject annotations, like _@KeycloakIntegrationTest_, _@InjectWebDriver_ or _@InjectRealm_.
```

Perhaps writing something like `The prototype is an JUnit 5 Extension...`

> Keycloak team had started a https://github.com/orgs/keycloak/projects/42[joint effort] between the engineering and quality engineering people to design a new test framework (May 2024). It had been initiated with a prototype to verify if our thoughts were feasible. The prototype was based on the _JUnit5_ testing framework, specifically to implement _JUnit5_ callback classes which extend the default test lifecycle functionality and provide custom inject annotations, like _@KeycloakIntegrationTest_, _@InjectWebDriver_ or _@InjectRealm_.

Reviewer 2: The board is private, and not visible to everyone. So we either remove the link, or cleanup the board and make it public

For our purpose, we have https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/main/test-framework/core/src/main/java/org/keycloak/test/framework/KeycloakIntegrationTestExtension.java[implemented] these three callback classes:
----
BeforeEachCallback
AfterEachCallback
AfterAllCallback

> ----

Reviewer 2: Would drop this, folks just need to know it's a JUnit 5 extension that is automatically added when you add the dependency; they don't need to know the internals.

> After a successful test round, we've continued with a proof of concept extending features list to support multiple server modes, different databases and _WebDrivers_, clients and users setup, _SmallRye_ configuration support, _OAuthClient_ based on https://connect2id.com/products/nimbus-oauth-openid-connect-sdk[_Nimbus SDK_] (this feature is a preview only) etc. The full list of currently implemented features can be found here in the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-framework/core/src/main/java/org/keycloak/test/framework/annotations[annotations package]. It is already present in the main branch and _Keycloak_ nightly builds.

Reviewer 2: The full list of features in the annotations package isn't the best way to list the features; and now that we split it up into multiple modules it doesn't list all annotations.

Reviewer 2: Maybe just do a bullet point list of features?

== Are you curious about where to start?
We suggest reading the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/main/test-framework/README.md[user guide], which will provide a basic overview of how the framework works and should be used. If this is not enough, you can also check https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-poc/examples[examples module].

> For extension developers we recommend to look into the showcase example on how to start _Keycloak_ with their custom provider - link.

Reviewer 2: Just a note that we need to update this before publishing the blog

> Once you find a bug, want to discuss something, or propose a new enhancement, please follow this GitHub feedback https://www.github.com/discussion#blabla[discussion] link.

Reviewer 2: Just a note that we need to update this before publishing the blog

> Once you find a bug, want to discuss something, or propose a new enhancement, please follow this GitHub feedback https://www.github.com/discussion#blabla[discussion] link.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you find a bug, want to discuss something, or propose a new enhancement, please follow this GitHub feedback https://www.github.com/discussion#blabla[discussion] link.
```

== Coming Soon

> Preview - https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/test-framework[_Keycloak Test Framework_] will be introduced in _Keycloak Nightly_ builds. We plan to add more features, which will cover 80% of functionalities currently available in the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/testsuite[integration test suite]. We also plan to introduce some new concepts, e.g. _@KeycloakTest_ annotation, which will add an option to test providers without the _Keycloak_ server running. It should be based on the _KeycloakSession_ class. Other interesting features should be parallel execution on a GitHub runner, adding a custom extension to a Keycloak server, or enabling a Keycloak cluster setup.

Reviewer 2: Is available, not will be ;)

Reviewer 2: Remove 80%, and say something like cover enough for most tests...

> == Coming Soon
> 
> Main plan is to cover enough features for most functionalities currently available in the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/tree/main/testsuite[integration test suite]. Next future step shall be to introduce some new concepts, e.g. _@KeycloakTest_ annotation, which will add an option to test providers without the _Keycloak_ server running. It should be based on the _KeycloakSession_ class. Other interesting features should be https://junit.org/junit5/docs/current/user-guide/#junit-platform-suite-engine[_JUnit5_ test suites], parallel execution on a GitHub runner or enabling a Keycloak cluster setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Next steps

We already have enough capabilities in the new test framework to start migrating some tests from the old testsuite; and in fact already have our very first test migrated. We plan to migrate one package at a time from the old testsuite starting with `admin` tests, then moving on to `forms` and `oauth` packages. As we are doing this we will expand on the capabilities of the test framework.

Some features we know will be coming soon include:

* An easier way to deploy custom providers, not requiring a Maven build of the provider first
* Improved logging, making it easy to configure logging from tests as well as Keycloak
* Easy testing of OAuth and OpenID Connect, including a mock application
* Extension to allow running code on the tested server when it's not possible to easily test through only remote interfaces
```

We also have some more long term plans to deliver:

* Provider tests that can be used to easily test a provider by invoking the provider directly
* Parallel execution of tests, to take full advantage of multiple cores to reduce test execution time

> :title: "Writing new tests has never been easier than before." Keycloak Test Framework

Reviewer 2: This title won't show very nicely on the website or feeds

```suggestion
:title: Introducing the Keycloak Test Framework
```

:date: 2024-11-14
:publish: true

> :author: Lukas Hanusovsky, Stian Thorgersen

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:author: Lukas Hanusovsky
```
